Here is the link to the presentation: [Here](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1n1WnqnwxUF4HrH-yBo7pV-MjE_CzNzhI/edit?usp=sharing&ouid=107454052234014703512&rtpof=true&sd=true)

# Our Goals and Acceptance Criteria
## Wellbeing Dream Team: Temi, Jarely, Sam, and Michael
### June 17th, 2022

Ideally by the end of the internship our team will have completed our project on student well-being with Dr. Nicole Noffsinger-Frazier. The central goal behind our work is to create a database for the Healthy Minds Survey data from 2016 to the present. Using this data we will analyze changes over time in flourishing and student mental and physical health markers. Specifically, we will answer the proposed research questions given to us by Dr. Noffsinger-Frazier while posing our own. Since this data is being made available for the first time, we will build a simple dashboard of our findings to display publicly on the University Health Service’s website for various audiences to view.

At minimum, the dashboard will display our findings in an appealing and concise manner. Building on that, the dashboard will be interactive so that the user can select what year(s) and variable(s) to compare. Ideally, we want the dashboard to be updated annually with the most recent Healthy Minds Survey data. This is only possible if the structure of the survey remains the same, if not, someone will have to manually update our dashboard as new data is available. These updates can be done by the current Well-being Dream team members or any future DataLab interns.

For this project we aspire to deliver a reproducible “assessment” of student flourishing. We hope this will help with preventive measures and interventions of mental health crises. We want to create an interactive dashboard that provides more in depth details on the correlations between flourishing and various behavioral habits. In the end, we hope to come with more research questions that can be answered by future DataLab interns. In the long term, we envision our research on flourishing extending beyond Sewanee to other academic institutions.

# Pre-Mortem

In the unlikely event that our plans do not come to fruition and the project is a complete failure, we have provided some possible reasons why this might occur: A key potential pain point we highlighted is a lack of planning around deliverables and perhaps needing a kick in the right direction. Not leaving enough time to complete deliverables for both DataLab and Dr. Noffsinger-Frazier could make our work rushed and second-rate. Currently, we prevent this from happening by having everyone pitch in on the deliverables and working ahead whenever we have free time. Another way we prevent this is by asking each other to provide input on the deliverables so we are all on the same page when presenting/turning the final deliverables in. 

Lack of team communication/miscommunication in general makes it difficult to function effectively and efficiently as a group and not individuals. Further possible contributors to an unsuccessful project include having an unclear final project idea (what the deliverables will look like) and a degree of ambiguity around the end goal and steps to get there. We can prevent this by checking in with Nicole and Dr. Gray to see what they think about dashboard (so far), and
checking in with each other to synchronize our visions of the final product; everyone should be vocal about what they think is best for the project and feel safe enough to voice their opinion. As individuals, we should empower and validate the group so everyone feels that their input/suggestions matter.

How do we account for and eliminate bias? We will know we are being biased if we are looking too hard to find an answer to our question, ignoring other variables, or manipulating the dataset to display results that we want. We plan to accurately display what the data is telling us by not showing only one side. Moreover, we can avoid bias by identifying factors that are excluded and overrepresented in our data set.

The final potential problem we foresee is the change in administration of the Healthy Minds Survey. This may affect our ability to ‘combine’ the datasets from each year, due to fundamental changes in the survey (for example, changes in the anxiety measures). A potential solution for this problem would be to just show the data separately by year and not try to compare them side-by-side. We could then leave a disclaimer about the way Healthy Minds changed the survey and that they aren’t directly comparable. For example, “This year and this year have different scales for measuring anxiety so they might not be directly comparable.”
