Here is the link to the presentation:
[Here](https://www.canva.com/design/DAFEc2FWKOU/U7kqfgTuEZRJRgyRSjINuA/view?utm_content=DAFEc2FWKOU&utm_campaign=designshare&utm_medium=link2&utm_source=sharebutton)

# Literature Review: College Student Well-being
## Well-being Dream Team: Temi Adejumobi, Jarely Soriano, Michael Komnick, and Sam Dean
### June 23rd, 2022

**Introduction**  
  College is a place of growth and transformation; where young adults are prepared both intellectually and socially for professional and adult life. However, over the last 10 years, the prevalence of mental health problems has risen steadily among college students with a particularly notable increase in symptom prevalence over the last 5 years (Meenan, 1). What is this down to? What are some key determinants of student flourishing and well-being? How do factors such as race and gender influence well-being? Using Healthy Mind’s Survey data that examines mental health, service utilization, and related issues among undergraduate and graduate students, our team of researchers at Sewanee DataLab are seeking to understand the well-being of students, and where to target resources to improve student flourishing, specifically at Sewanee: The University of The South. This report serves as an exploration of prior research on the topic of student flourishing, well-being, mental health, service utilization and help seeking behavior specifically in the college setting.  

**The Prevalence of Poor Mental Health**  
  From 2016 to 2020, depression prevalence among college students rose from 25% to 39%, and anxiety prevalence rose from 21% to 34%. The COVID-19 pandemic did not create a spike in these prevalence rates, indicating the continuation of this troubling trend (Abelson, Sara et al.) Mental health service utilization rates in college populations have increased as prevalence rates have increased. For example, the percentage of students screening positive for depression or anxiety who received some form of mental health treatment during the past year has increased during the past decade from 19-26% to 53-56%, (Abelson, Sara et al.). The increased use of mental health services is also due to the decreasing levels of stigma reported by students. Particularly, while both perceived and personal stigma have decreased over time, personal stigma is still a significant predictor of service utilization. Despite this increase in service utilization, there is still a noticeable ‘treatment gap,’ which is the proportion of individuals with an apparent need for services who have not received treatment. The Healthy Minds Network reports the depression/anxiety treatment gap in the fall of 2019 as 44% (Abelson, Sara et al.).  
  There are several mental health risk factors that may contribute to why some students do well, and others do not. Some individual factors include separation from the family unit, culture shock, academic pressures, student debt, and uncertainties about job prospects. The most common risk factor is financial stress; for example, the Healthy Minds Survey found that of students who “report their financial situation as ‘always stressful’ or ‘often stressful,’ 60% and 45% respectively have apparent mental health symptoms relative to 29% of those who reported no stress.” Substance use, particularly binge drinking and marijuana use, and unhealthy sleep habits are also significant individual risk factors for mental health. Discrimination is a key interpersonal risk factor that negatively impacts mental health, no matter in which ways the discrimination manifests. Loneliness and isolation are also interpersonal risk factors for poor mental health, and in the most recent Healthy Minds Survey, over 60% of students reported feeling left out or isolated from others. Some institutional factors that are correlated with higher prevalence of mental health issues include the following characteristics: being public and state-funded, having large enrollment, being nonresidential, being less academically competitive, and having lower graduation rates (Abelson, Sara et al.).  

**Pathways to Flourishing**  
  Verge is a platform that integrates evidence-based research on the science of well-being to help individuals live their best, most fulfilling lives. This platform was created by the Associate Dean of Flourishing and Wellness at Sewanee: The University of the South, Dr. Nicole Noffsinger-Frazier, in hopes to help people start their flourishing journey. Verge also has a self assessment tool questionnaire that guides students in identifying their values, strengths, and areas of flourishing that they would like to improve on. Improvements are currently being made to the site with  recommended “next steps” towards flourishing. Tyler VanderWeele’s research on flourishing, which he believes is a state in which all aspects of a person’s life are good, is used by Verge to determine ‘pathways’ to flourishing. VanderWeele emphasizes four major pathways that are relatively common and have sizable impacts on the domains of flourishing. The four pathways are family, work, education, and religious community, and the following diagram relates these pathways to various flourishing outcomes (VanderWeele, Tyler J.). However, these are not the only pathways to flourishing, and there may even be subsets of pathways within each category. For instance, a sense of belonging, which is the human need to belong to and be accepted within a community, positively influences mental health. Specifically, “among those with the lowest levels of belonging, 51% screen positive for one or more mental health problems relative to 27% among those with the highest levels of belonging” (Abelson, Sara et al.) Arguably, a sense of belonging to the college community could be seen as a pathway to flourishing for college students.  


**Mental Health, Racial Minorities and LGBTQIA+ individuals**  
  Prior research on student well being has repeatedly shown that mental health problems are more common in historically marginalized populations. According to Robert Meenan, President of Christie Campus Health and partner of The Healthy Minds Network, “rates of mental health service utilization are significantly lower among cisgender males, international students, first-generation and low-income students, and Students of Color. This mental health inequity has been greatly exacerbated during the past year as the losses and dislocations of the COVID-19 pandemic have fallen much more harshly on black people, indigenous people, and people of color (BIPOC)”. Furthermore, studies suggest some social determinants of mental health include “poverty, childhood neglect, discrimination, housing insecurity, food insecurity, and loneliness. In concert with the daily toll of racial discrimination, these factors promote anxiety, depression, and other mental health problems” creating inhibition towards help seeking behaviour that stems from various factors including concerns about cost, social stigma, religious traditions, and general mistrust of the health care system (Meenan, 2). During the COVID-19 pandemic, additional factors like separation from campus resources, lack of private spaces, and limited access to technology exacerbated the situation.  
  Empirical studies show that there is a higher prevalence of mental health problems among transgender and gender nonconforming students compared to cisgender students. This increased prevalence is also seen among lesbian, gay, bisexual, and queer students compared to heterosexual students (Abelson, Sara et al.). In fact, 92% of LGBTQIA+ college students describe their mental health as having a negative impact on their college experience. In addition, 30% of LGBTQIA+ students have considered dropping out of college due to their mental health concerns. A specific example of a mental health concern among these students is that nearly one third reported having thoughts of suicide during the past year. This rate for LGBTQIA+ is close to double the rate of straight students, which is 16%. Students who identify as a member of the LGBTQIA+ community also experience a more difficult time seeking and receiving treatment for their mental health. The expense of mental health assistance has prevented 35% of these students from seeking treatment. Furthermore, students who identify as BIPOC and LGBTQIA+ are more likely to report they have not pursued mental health assistance than white LGBTQIA+ students (Byrant, Jessica).  

**The Importance of College Students’ Well-Being**  
	Seventy-five percent of lifetime mental illnesses emerge by the age of 24, around the age of a traditional college student. The mental health problems associated with low levels of wellbeing can have detrimental consequences on the present and future development of college students; These mental health issues are typically precursors to difficulties in students’ adult lives. There are strong connections between mental health issues and poverty, disadvantage, and deprivation. Not only can those be effects of mental health issues, but causes of them as well. Evidence shows that happy and healthy students have improved concentration, motivation, and energy levels, more easily develop coping skills, are more successful in relationships, tend to overcome difficulties successfully, and continue success in academic pursuits. (Oxford Student Wellbeing: An analysis of the evidence)  


**Psychological Health of College Students During COVID-19 Pandemic**  
  According to a principal investigator of the Healthy Minds Study and professor at U.C.L.A., the rate of depression, serious thoughts of suicide, and anxiety has doubled in the past 10 years. The isolation and stress from COVID-19 only exacerbated that for college students. Students reported lower levels of psychological wellbeing during the pandemic than before it. However, they reported higher levels of resiliency.  

**Wellbeing in Rural Areas**  
  Education Redesign from the Harvard Graduate School of Education provides a case study about some of the assets rural communities provide that benefits the wellbeing of students. Distance, no public transportation, and a lack of resources is bad for the mental health of students. However, schools in rural areas have the potential to foster a strong sense of community in ways that urban areas can not. While rural communities face tremendous challenges for resources, they are strong in creating close-knit relationships and culture of communal responsibility and shared experiences help with collaborative efforts. It’s important to address the strengths and weaknesses of Sewanee being such a rural area so we can identify the best ways to create a flourishing community.  

**Conclusion**  
  In conclusion, through examination and analysis of empirical research on the topic of student flourishing, well-being, mental health, service utilization and help seeking behavior, we are afforded a clearer understanding of what flourishing looks like for students in a college setting and the varied factors that influence it. This paper serves as a communication of those findings that will help as we endeavor to conduct our research. Our purpose is to analyze Healthy Mind’s Survey data to understand the well-being of students, and where to target resources to improve student flourishing.  


**References**  

Abelson, Sara et al. “Mental Health in College Populations: A Multidisciplinary Review of What Works, Evidence Gaps, and Paths Forward.” Higher Education: Handbook of Theory and Research (2021): pg. 5-10.
Bryant, Jessica. “30% Of LGBTQIA+ College Students Have Considered Dropping out Due to Mental Health: BestColleges.” BestColleges.com, 10 June 2022, https://www.bestcolleges.com/research/lgbtq-mental-health/. 
Hartocollis, Anemona. “Colleges Fear Mental Health Crisis Amid Covid Surge.” The New York Times, 22 December 2021, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/12/22/us/covid-college-mental-health-suicide.html. Accessed 23 June 2022.

Meenan, Robert. “Christie Campus Health.” The Healthy Minds Study Investigators Author a Definitive Overview of College Student Mental Health, christiecampus.com, 1 May 2022, www.christiecampus.com/stay-informed/blog/june-2022/the-healthy-minds-study-investigators-author-a-def. Meenan, 1.

Sara White and Jessica Boyle. Collaborative Action in a Rural Setting: Insights from Resilient Southern Illinois. Cambridge, MA: Education Redesign Lab, 2021.

“The Mental Health Needs of Minority College Students.” Christiecampus.Com, christiecampus.com, 1 July 2021, www.christiecampus.com/stay-informed/blog/july-2021/mental-health-minority-college-students#:%7E:text=Among%20college%20students%2C%20those%20from,%2C%20food%20insecurity%2C%20and%20loneliness. Meenan, 2 

VanderWeele, Tyler J. “On the promotion of human flourishing.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America vol. 114,31 (2017): 8148-8156. doi:10.1073/pnas.1702996114

Woolf, Penelope, and Jane Digby. “Student Wellbeing: An Analysis of the Evidence.” Oxford Impact, 2021, oxfordimpact.oup.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/Student-wellbeing-impact-study-white-paper.pdf.

